>> Will Sentance: So we have to
introduce a whole new world of features
of JavaScript.
These are features that happen outside
of our JavaScript engine itself.
These are features of the web browser.
JavaScript's a little feature
of the broader web browser.
Web browser is full of features.
The dorm, that's the model of our
webpage that JavaScript can interact
with to change stuff on the webpage.
It's a sort of representation
of the stuff on our page
that JavaScript can write code to
interact with that changes our webpage.
That's a feature outside of JavaScript.
A console is another web browser feature
that's a feature outside of JavaScript.
Our local storage,
that database thing in the browser.
Our ability to speak to the Internet,
the XHR ability,
all of these are not JavaScript features.
They're found on MDN.
As a list of web browser features known or
be it, in JavaScript as web browser API's.
The reason they are know as that in
JavaScript is that we use labels for
those features from within
JavaScript to stimulate,
to get started, a web browser feature.
And any feature that's
not in my own runtime,
in my own engine is
something interface with.
So, we call it an AP Interface an API,
so we interact outside of
JavaScript.
>> Will Sentance: We gotta introduce those
to have any chance of solving
this three-way conundrum.
The only chance we have of solving it
is introduced web browser features or
in Node, they're known as background
threads or APIs in Node as well.
So here we go people.
Line by line,
we're going to walk through this.
And this solution I'm going to tell you,
everything else is just
an augmentation of this solution.
I like this solution.
But JavaScript designers recognize
some failings of this solution.
And solution three is gonna
be our brand new solution.
And that is the most popular.
But I still think our final solution,
we're gonna see the very end of
the day is the solution that finally
is particularly nice, I think.
And all of these solutions work including
solution two if you understand how they're
working under the hood.
So here we go.
Line one Michelle, what are we doing?
>> Michelle: We're declaring
a function and memory called print hello.
>> Will Sentance: Excellent.
Thank you, Michelle.
Can you tell it a little bit slower
while I continue to wipe down my white
board?
>> Michelle: We're defining a function in
memory called print hello.
>> Will Sentance: Print hello.
I'm trying to keep my handwriting tidy for
posterity.
There we go.
That's better, good.
All right, excellent.
Thank you Michelle, excellent.
Next line, talk to me in general terms.
Victor, what are we doing in my next line?
What are we calling?
>> Victor: I
think we're calling the-
>> Will Sentance: Don't try and
be smart about it.
>> Victor: Okay,
we're talking to the global
execution context.
To use a-
>> Will Sentance: Okay,
stop trying to be smart.
Someone else speak in more abstract terms.
Very good, Victor.
We're going to come to it in a sec.
I just want to first, Mike.
>> Mike: I think we're
actually trying to print our function.
>> Will Sentance: Okay, so
we just need to be more abstract.
We're calling set timer
with what arguments,
Ben?
>> Ben: Print hello.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, the entire print
hello function definition.
Be really clear.
When I call a function, what symbols
tell me I'm calling a function event?
>> Ben: The parentheses.
>> Will Sentance: Parens, parens, parens,
parens.
I'm calling set timeout.
Do I see any parens on the end of hello?
Definitely not,
I'm instead passing the entire
function definition into set timeout.
Who knows what that means?
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: And the second argument
1,000 which represents
the number of milliseconds
after which I want this print hello
function to be called, to be invoked.
So it's gonna be auto-invoked,
kind of beyond my control probably, right?
Somewhere inside Set time out, wrong,
but let's imagine that's the case.
Let's imagine that is the case that
somehow, when I put parens up, function
call, Brian, what do I create, a new?
>> Brian: Execution context.
>> Will Sentance: Execution context,
everything suggests I would,
let's just see what would
happen if that were the case.
New execution context,
there it is Into it I go
and then plus 1000 milliseconds.
It's gonna stay on the cool stack for
1000 milliseconds.
We're gonna be inside this and
you've got execution context.
At which time, I'm then going to, well,
JavaScript set time out is gonna call for
me, print hello and
we're gonna come back out.
At about 1,001 milliseconds and
hit what line,
Michelle?
>> Michelle: The set
time out.
>> Will Sentance: Nichole.
>> Michelle: The console log.
>> Will Sentance: The console log,
me first.
Okay, 1,001 milliseconds later.
I've continued my JavaScript synchronous
thread, a thousand one [INAUDIBLE].
Does this seem likely,
as how to set timeout works?
>> Michelle: No.
>> Will Sentance: This would be
disastrous.
This is absolutely not
what set timeout's doing.
Set timeout, in fact, does nothing.
Here's one little thing in Javascript, but
in fact, does nothing of any
interest in JavaScript at all.
It is instead a facade function.
A facade for functionality
happening outside of JavaScript.
Where?
In what place?
>> Multiple: Browser.
>> Will Sentance: The web browser.
JavaScript has no timer.
>> Will Sentance: JavaScript
is not the timer that set timeout's using.
We've got to introduce a whole new
section to our model app platform, for
understanding JavaScript's runtime.
It's actually not even in JavaScript,
>> Will Sentance: The web browser,
let's try and
keep this tidy the Web Browser features,
there it is, my proudest moment,
there it is.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, Ben look up.
That's a beautiful illustration.
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: It's not as good as I
thought it was actually.
I'm disappointed with that.
Let me try that again.
I've been practicing that for so long.
The only thing I prepared.
There we go.
Too small this time.
[LAUGH] I got it too small this time.
Now let's look at.
Okay, here we go straight.
And you've got pho for this time.
>> Ben: I
like the Firefox.
>> Will Sentance: Thanks man,
nice.
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: I don't even know what
that looks like.
That's got too many bits to it.
And also I'm anti open source.
No, no.
>> Multiple: [LAUGH]
>> Will Sentance: That's a joke.
It's a joke.
That's a joke, big fan.
Big fan of Firefox.
Ever since 2010, big fan.
All right, good, web browser features.
Set timer is gonna do
nothing in JavaScript.
Instead, it's gonna spin up a web
browser feature, but which one?
Does anyone know what the features called?
>> Michelle: A work
group?
>> Ben: Timer.
>> Will Sentance: Timer, brilliant Ben.
You're gifted.
There it is, timer.
And we're going to take the information we
need, which is a function that we want to
have called, the reference to the position
in JavaScript's memory of the function, we
want to have called then and the important
property being the thousand milliseconds.
And down in the web browser, down in
the web browser, we are going to spin up
our timer with 1,000
milliseconds as our property.
And then we're gonna
have a kind of condition.
Is it complete?
Ben, is it complete yet?
>> Ben: No.
>> Will Sentance: Definitely not, exactly.
At 1 millisecond,
it is definitely not complete.
And then on completion, Ben,
what are we gonig to want to invoke?
>> Ben: Print
hello.
>> Will Sentance: Print hello exactly on
completion, on completion we are going to
want invoke
>> Will Sentance: We
are gonna want to invoke
we're gonna wanna run print.
Hello, the function.
All right, set timeout's work is now done.
It's only work of interest was the work
it does outside of JavaScript.
Technically in JavaScript it returns
a value representing a timer, okay, fine.
But it has nothing of any
interest in JavaScript.
Its only job is in the Web
browser spin up this work.
Meaning, we can move on from this line,
this line until we finished its work,
in JavaScript, well, it's nothing.
So we move straight on to Alec.
What is our next line of code at about two
milliseconds that the JavaScript engine,
we've just onset time out,
the JavaScript engine is going to execute?
>> Alec: It's gonna log me first to
the console.
>> Will Sentance: Exactly,
log me first, beautiful.
Me first is there.
And look, people, we're very,
very close to being happy.
We've spun up, we got started on
a task that takes a long time,
here albeit just a timer
with functionality.
You want to call it the end of it,
not the most interesting task but
it's a task takes a long time and
we've continued straight on.
There you go, accelerated, that's not
a good new additional piece to my diagram.
We continued straight on
in our synchronous job at
the execution to add console log.
Look at that.
This is very, very nice.
This is the first part.
But now we're going to encounter
the issue, it's basically going to be
our issue ongoing, which is,
now we have functionality.
That's gonna hopefully come back in and
be run, how?
JavaScript sync, JavaScript synchronous
code, like the regular code,
the stuff that's top to bottom,
line by line, is done now.
But and since I call stack,
I should highlight call stack up, sorry.
Just make sure our call stacks up.
JavaScript synchronous code is done now.
There it is.
But in the background,
a world of stuff is happening.
Our little timer,
it's clicking by, as it goes.
And at about 1001 milliseconds,
what happens?
Brian.
>> Brian: It executes the print
hello.
>> Will Sentance: Right,
is it complete at 1000 milliseconds?
Is our timer complete after 1000
milliseconds?
>> Brian: Yes.
>> Will Sentance: It's complete and so
we're able to call print hello.
What does it mean in terms of my callsat,
Brian,
to say I execute call print hello?
>> Brian: It adds it to a queue?
>> Will Sentance: We'll come
to that in one second.
What does it mean, it tells my call stack?
>> Brian: It
adds print hello to the call stack.
>> Will Sentance: The call stack.
Excellent, Brian, thank you man.
It adds it to the call stack.
That is to say, the thing that was
happening outside of the web browser
is gonna send a message to say.
Print hello function,
get it back on the call stack.
It's ready to be executed back in
JavaScript at about 1,001 milliseconds.
So there it is, look at that.
At 1,001 milliseconds,
we get our JavaScript Code.
Our JavaScript function,
the one we deferred, is allowed back in.
It calls print hello,
which console logs hello.
And so this is a beautiful outcome.
This is it.
Our three goals were do
tasks that take a long time
like deferring a function with a timer.
Continue running our Java Script
code in the meantime.
Oops, no, wrong way.
Continue running our JavaScript
code in the meantime.
Console code, we first continued,
immediately after.
We set up a task, set time out,
it was going to take a long time.
We set up long term tasks and we continue
the hell straight on 2 milliseconds later
and when our slow task, that is this
countdown on the timer, completes.
Be able to run functionality knowing
the task is done and data is ready.
No data to be ready here.
But we'll see in a moment
what that looks like.
All right, thumbs on this concept.
I want to add,
there are a whole bunch of edge cases.
Things where you go, but
what about if that happened?
But what about if that happened?
I wanna see some medium thumbs on
clarifications but what if that happened?
We're gonna see in a moment
when you interact with a world
outside of this pure
synchronous JavaScript engine.
You're going to need to have
some really strict rules for
when our JavaScript engine allows
this differed functionality back in.